Trip to Crete, Greece — Summer of 2022

Here are some photos from our trip to Crete, Greece in July 2022. We stayed in a village called Malemè. This was our first trip to a foreign country in a couple of years. I got a few shots using my Fujifilm X100V out of the cabin window.

PS! For the best experience, read this story over at weholt.org. Medium keeps messing up when I import a story from my main blog.

Like a few other popular areas in Crete, like Platanias, and Agia Marina, the village itself is divided by the main road, without a clear speed limit. This road can become a nuisance due to traffic sound if you stay in an apartment close to the road, and as mentioned, they drive damn fast so watch out.

We stayed at a place called Futura Hotel, which was colorful and with lots of plants all over the place. Our room had plain, basic standards, nothing fancy, like an ocean view or view of the swimming pool, but it had air-conditioning, a fridge, and all the essentials. And the staff was nice and helpful.

We went for a short walk down to the beach on our first day and passed this old, rusty car with some sort of cannon next to it.

Then we had a very nice lunch at a place by the beach, called Menta Beach Bar. I ordered the vegetarian version of a Gyros pita, which they called Arabic pita, which tasted great :-).

I like to shoot photos of myself using sunglasses as mirrors. Or just point the camera straight down into a glass of beer. I call it art.

Malemè has pretty beaches, but with hard rocks instead of soft sand.

The Malemè boardwalk

Sunset at Malemè beach.

Later that day we took a trip to Chania, the “capital” of Crete. There are a lot of scooters and motorcycles.

Old town in Chania.

The next day we took a bus to visit Iguana Beach.

Here are some random photos of some random people.

Just beside Iguana Beach, there’s a beach called Sunset Beach.

The next day we walked from Iguana Beach to yet another beach just a few hundred meters away, called Yannis Beach.

We celebrated our 12th anniversary at a restaurant called Mylos tou Kerata, in Platanias. It had several vegetarian options, but I went with the cauliflower steak, which was awesome. Highly recommend this restaurant.

The next day, we took a trip back to Chania.

A cruise to Balos Lagoon.

We purchased a cruise on one of the daily cruises out to the lovely Balos Lagoon.

First, we had a stop at Gramvousa beach, on the pirate island.

Some tourist attraction called Motor ship Dimitrios P.

Balos Lagoon.

This is probably the most beautiful beach I’ve seen. It’s hard to recreate the feeling in photographs, but it’s worth a visit, even if the cruise getting us there was a bit pricey.

Then we flew home. And I got another shot of the plain using my trusty X100V 😉

Originally published at http://weholt.org.